In this video, we will
listen to several data professionals talk about
how they define data engineering and how it
differs from data analytics and data science. Data engineering is the tasks of designing, building,
maintaining data infrastructures and platforms. These data
infrastructures can include databases, Big Data
repositories, as well as data pipelines for transforming and
moving data between these systems. So, a Data Engineer is
someone who performs these tasks of developing and optimizing
data systems and make data available for analysis. Whereas a Data Analyst is
someone who analyzes data in these systems to report and
derive insights. And a Data Scientist takes this
even further by performing deeper analysis on the data and
developing predictive models to solve more complex data
problems. As data engineers, we are kind of the plumbers of
data. We make sure that the data is highly available. We make
sure that the data is consistent. We make sure that
the data is secure. And we make sure that the data is
recoverable. We don't spend as much time playing with the data
or analyzing the data, or actually using the data, as we
do making sure it's ready for others to do those jobs. Alot of
times, data science and data analytics will make use of the
data that we that we store. It's also a scenario where
we work closely with other data professionals to make sure that
the data matches their needs and is available in a way that
actually helps them. Data engineering is all about designing, maintaining, and
optimizing systems that will help enterprises and companies
make the most of their data. When we get into specifics, it's
all about choosing the right databases, the right storage
systems, the right cloud architectures or cloud
platforms, so that when we put together all these things, the
data flow inside an organization is seamless and data can be
delivered to whoever needs it at whatever time, with minimal
effort and as soon as possible. In an ideal organization with
the best data engineering processes, anybody can get
access to any data that he or she is authorized to in
a split second of time. Now, if you talk about data
analysts and data scientists, their work can be thought of as
an upstream work. That is, after the job of a data engineer
finishes and the data is made available, then data analysts
and data scientists can make use of that data to work out their
analysis and come up with their predictions. Data engineers
extract and collect raw data from multiple sources, transform them and store them in table forms. While other scientists or
analysts, they perform analysis on top of the data
that's prepared by data engineering and try to engage business insights from
those data. You can think of data engineering as a precursor to
the data analysis and data science. Data engineers act as
enablers and make the data projects of data analysts and
data scientists materialize into reality. For example, they can
assist the data analysts and data scientists with picking the
right databases and tools, and by building the required data
pipelines to help with their data needs, and build
their reports, and perform statistical analysis.