In the first part of this video,
we will listen to data professionals talk about some of
the technical skills required to be a successful Data Engineer. Data engineering is a very fast
evolving technology and obviously you need to love data,
otherwise you shouldn't be a data engineer. And from coming
to technical skills, it really depends on what data
engineering needs are required to fill a particular job
role. For example, if you are working in retail, you may need
one skill set. For example, they may look for experience with relational
databases, and Cassandra, or Google Big Table kind of architecture
related knowledge because they try to build 365 by
24x7 applications. And also build pipelines using Kafka
Streams and WebSphere MQ to perform some back office
processing of the transactional data. And then, if you're working
in healthcare, you may need a different skill set. If you're
working in social media like Twitter or Facebook, you would
need different kinds of skill set. So data engineering is a
very wide topic. Given the job role, requirements vary.
Technical is actually the easy part because you can learn a new
technology; you can figure out new things. It's important that
you have the basic theory behind data structures and how to work
with data. If you don't enjoy change, if you don't enjoy
learning, data engineering is not the right place for you.
There's a lot of change in any data field and you have to be
willing to roll with that change. You need to have good
networking skills about both LAN and then the VAN. And you need to be good at
understanding different kind of storages, the local storage as
well as the cloud storage. And you need to have a very good
knowledge of operating systems. And then you should be an expert
at databases, both RDBMS databases and the NoSQL databases. Programming knowledge
is very, very helpful. Any language in a Java, C or Python
would be a very great value add. And in today's data engineering
landscape, automation is a very, very good skill to have.
In terms of technical skills, a data engineer needs to work
with one or more programming languages, operating systems,
and have a knowledge of IT infrastructure and landscape.
This includes computer architecture, cloud, virtual
machines, containers, and different types of storage and
how to use and work with them. And a data engineer needs to be
very proficient at SQL and needs to have a working knowledge with
one or more databases, both relational and NoSQL. And it's not needed to get
started, but it's very useful to have knowledge and
experience of the bigger data engineering ecosystem, which
includes ETL, data pipelines, data warehouses, data lakes
and other Big Data systems. Different companies have
different requirements for data engineers. Even within
the same company, the requirement, the skills
required, for data engineers may change overtime as
the thing goes. But in general, in my opinion,
there are four essential technical skills for data engineers,
They are SQL, and data modeling, ETL methodologies, and
programming skills like Python. In the second part
of this video we will listen to data
professionals talk about some of the qualities and
soft skills required to be a successful data engineer. So to become a data engineer and
be successful at it, you need to enjoy problem solving and troubleshooting. You need to be
good at teamwork, collaboration and communication. And it's good
to be, you know, being good at logic and having an interest in
coding is very useful. From a data engineer, from a non-
technical perspective, we expect a data engineer to be a problem solver.
And we want him or her to have very good communication skills as
data engineer is constantly involved with multiple teams.
So it helps if he's a good communicator. You should be very curious
and you should be able to ask a lot of questions to the
business users and technical users. And then use that knowledge
from those answers to build robust data pipelines
using reliable data sources and suitable data pipelines. My
saying has always been whether working as a DBA or a data
engineer, the best one is a detail oriented control-freak.
And that's because there is a lot of detail involved in
working with data. It's important to really be
comfortable with the details, and get into the details, and make
sure that you don't leave any of the boxes unchecked.
Control-freak because my data environment. That's my baby.
That's what I spend as much time with as my children
sometimes. And so that's something where I need to be in
control or aware of the choices that are being made there, and
what tradeoffs those particular choices have. The most important
skills are soft skills. You need to be able to interact with
developers. You need to be able to defend your choices to
management. You need to be able to advocate for the choices that
you're making and the details of those choices, and why they are
important and why things need to be done in a particular way. So
those things and a work ethic and passion to learn are the
most important things. Curiosity, good communication,
and eagerness to learn are pretty critical for data engineers.