Welcome to Data fundamentals review. Today’s world is full of data. But how do we define data? Data is unorganized information, that is processed
to make it meaningful. It can consist of Facts, observations, perceptions Numbers characters symbols Images Or a mix of any of these. Data can be categorized by the level and rigidity
of its structure. Data can be structured, semi-structured or
unstructured. Structured data can be represented in rows
and columns, just like a table. It has a well-defined schema, and a rigid
structure. These characteristics make relational databases,
which store data in tables, ideal for structured data. Semi-structured data has some organizational
properties, but not enough to be easily stored in the rows and columns required by a rigid,
tabular schema. Instead, semi-structured data is organized
into a hierarchy using tags and metadata. Unstructured data doesn’t have an identifiable
structure; it doesn’t follow any specific format, sequence, semantics, or rules. It cannot be organized into tabular format
for storage in a relational database. Unstructured data is often stored in NoSQL
databases. There is a multitude of data sources available
today. From existing data stored in databases, flat
files, or XML data sets to data gathered from web scraping, data streams and feeds, to data
collected from social platforms and Internet of Things devices with sensors. All of this data can be stored, processed,
and made available for analysis, providing businesses with insights into their performance. Data can be held or transferred between systems
in many different files formats. Common formats include: Delimited text files. In these files the data is stored in rows,
with each variable separated by a specific character, like a comma or a tab. Delimited files include comma separated variable
(CSV) and tab separated variable (TSV) files. Spreadsheets. In these files, the data is stored in rows
and columns, just like a table. This makes the data easy to access and manipulate. You can use a spreadsheet to create CSV files. Language. Language files like Extensible Markup Language
(XML) and JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) have set rules and structures for encoding
data to be sent over the internet. XML is readable by both humans and machines,
is platform independent, and is programming language independent, that is it can be read
in any programming language. JSON is also programming language independent. It is a popular choice for sharing data of
any size and type, including audio and video. It’s returned by many APIs and Web services. So, once you have gathered all your data,
where should you store it? Structured and semi-structured data is often
stored in databases; either relational databases like DB2 or non-relational databases like
MongoDB. Each type of database is optimized for different
types of operations. The type of data you need and the processes
you want to apply to it will determine the type storage you choose. An Online Transaction Processing (OLTP) system
is optimized for storing the high-volume of day-to-day operational data that many businesses
rely on. OLTP systems are typically relational databases
but can also be built on relational databases. An Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) system
is optimized for conducting complex data analytics. OLAP systems include relational and non-relational
databases, data warehouses, data lakes and other big data stores. Relational databases consist of structured
data stored in related tables. The links between the tables are defined in
a way that minimizes the duplication of data while still maintaining all the complex relationships
required. Relational databases and their supporting
systems are called Relational Database Management Systems, or RDBMS. Examples include IBM DB2, Microsoft SQL Server,
Oracle, My SQL. Relational databases are primarily OLTP systems,
used to support day-to-day business activities such as customer transactions, human resource
activities, and workflows. They can also be used to perform data analysis,
for example, data from a customer relationship management system can be used to make sales
projections. In this video, you learned that: Data is information like facts, observations,
perceptions, numbers, characters, and images that can be processed to become meaningful. Data can be structured, semi-structured, or
unstructured. Different data sources offer different types
of data, for example data from social media can be unstructured or semi-structured. Data can be stored in repositories like relational
databases and non-relational databases, amongst many others. Data can be transferred in CSV, XML, and JSON
files.