Welcome to Information and Data Models. After watching this video, you will be able
to: Describe the difference between an information
model and a data model. Explain the advantage of the relational model
Describe the difference between an entity and an attribute
This figure illustrates the relationship between an Information Model and a Data Model. An Information Model is an abstract, formal
representation of entities that includes their properties, relationships and the operations
that can be performed on them. The entities being modeled can be from the
real world, such as a library. Information Models and Data Models are different
and serve different purposes. An Information Model is at the conceptual
level and defines relationships between objects. Data Models are defined at a more concrete
level, are specific and include details. A data model is the blueprint of any database
system. There are several types of Information Models. The most familiar is the Hierarchical, typically
used to show organization charts. As shown is in this figure, the hierarchical
model organizes its data using a tree structure. The root of the tree is the parent node followed
by child nodes. A child node cannot have more than one parent;
however, a parent can have many child nodes. The first hierarchical database management
system was the Information Management System released by IBM in 1968 and was originally
built as the database for the Apollo space program. The Relational Model is the most used data
model for databases because this model allows for data independence. Data is stored in a simple data structure,
tables. This provides logical data independence, physical
data independence, and physical storage independence. An Entity-Relationship Data Model, or ER Data
Model, is an alternative to a relational data model. Using a simplified library database as an
example, this figure shows an Entity-Relationship Diagram, or ERD, that represents entities
(called tables) and their relationships. There are authors who write books, borrowers
who take books out on loan, various copies of each book, etc. This is the final ER diagram. But how do you get there? An Entity-Relationship Model proposes thinking
of a database as a collection of entities. Rather than being used as a model on its own,
the ER Model is used as a tool to design relational databases. In the ER Model, entities are objects that
exist independently of any other entities in the database. It is simple to convert an ER Diagram into
a collection of tables. The building blocks of an ER Diagram are entities
and attributes. Entities have attributes, which are the data
elements that characterize the entity. Attributes tell us more about the entity. In an ER Diagram, an entity is drawn as a
rectangle, and attributes are drawn as ovals. Entities can be a noun (person, place,
or thing). Using a simplified library as an example,
a book is an example of an entity. Attributes are certain properties or characteristics
of an entity and tell us more about the entity. The entity Book has attributes such as book
title, the edition of the book, the year the book was written, etc. Attributes are connected to exactly one entity. The entity Book becomes a table in the database,
and the attributes become the columns in a table. Continuing the simplified library example,
books are written by authors. Book is an entity, and Author is an entity. For the entity Author, the ER Diagram would
look like this. The entity Author has attributes such as the
author’s last name, first name, email, city, country and an author ID (to uniquely identify
the author). The entity Author becomes a table in the database,
and the attributes become the columns in the table. In the simplified library database, you progress
through the process of identifying entities, such as borrowers who take books out on loan,
various copies of each book, and copies of books out on loan. This is the final ER Diagram. Each entity becomes a table in the database. In this video, you learned that:
Information Models are abstract, formal representations of entities that include their properties,
relationships and the operations that can be performed on them. Data Models are defined at a more concrete
level, are specific and include details. The Relational Model is the most used data
model for databases because this model allows for logical data independence, physical data
independence, and physical storage independence. Entities are objects that exist independently
of any other entities in the database. Entities can be a noun (person, place, or
thing), such as a book or an author. Attributes are the data elements that characterize
the entity. For example, the book entity will have attributes
like author and title.